“Dad NEEDS an Xbox for his birthday.” I was desperate to convince my mom of that, and it must have worked. On April 8, 2012, dad unwrapped a collector’s edition R2D2 Xbox 360. At that moment, I thought my summer plans were set, but I should have recognized the Star Wars theme as foreshadowing my parent’s greatest trap. They had planned well; I didn’t stand a chance. They laid the trap where I was most vulnerable: in the basement where I played Xbox. I wandered into it without any suspicion. Once I was in position, my mother sprung the trap “Jared, you can’t just play Xbox all summer. You need to do something productive.” I was too immersed in a difficult mission to sense the danger, so I replied without looking away. “It’s break. What else am I supposed to do?” My dad interjected: “You could do an online programming course if you have nothing betters [sic]” (my dad is an immigrant and always says that). With that I was trapped: the Xbox was taken hostage. In trade for its release, I had to complete a basic programming course. While I regretted my time away from the Xbox initially, participating in the online course ultimately inspired me to dabble in programing as a hobby. After completing additional courses, I decided to pursue projects of my own.My first project was selfish: I wanted an app to track rank requirements for Boy Scouts. After spending several weeks writing 3,000 lines of Jar Jar Binks level code, I ran it. The console filled with lines of red text like blood pouring down the screen. It was a wall of incomprehensible error messages. However, just like any other wall – no matter how long, high, or wide– there was a way around it. Days later, I discovered the problem and the wall errors gave way to satisfaction as the program ran. That feeling was addictive and led me to increasingly difficult projects. I worked on apps, desktop applications, website, and I even entered the Library of Congress’s data challenge. Along the way, I found myself working with like-minded individuals, which led to the creation of Code for Change, a computer coding group that creates software solutions benefiting the community. Before working with Code for Change most of my projects were like the first: selfish. However, the group gives me an outlet to use my skills and have a positive impact. Aside from my development responsibilities, I am part of a leadership team that works tirelessly to maximize our team’s impact in the community. In our first year, the passion and vision of our club benefited Exodus Refugee, the Indiana Civil Rights Commission, and Carmel High School, and our work continues to expand with more chapters and projects.Although Code for Change is rewarding, it does not satisfy my desire to be challenged. To fill this gap, I conduct research with Dr. Ankur Gupta at Butler University. Before our first meeting, I was nervous, so I prepared as much as I could by developing potential research questions and topics. However, my nervousness did not subside until we started discussing one of my passions: machine learning. After we talked about the different algorithms I had implemented, papers I had read, and informal experiments I had conducted, we developed an impactful research question focusing on AI performance. Currently, I balance my free time between research (writing code, reading papers, performing tests), Code for Change and other activities, and my part-time job.In the last year I have learned to embrace ambiguity: Dr. Gupta always asks me “why” questions, and they are the key to my future. Life is not so much about having the answers, as the desire and ability to ask questions. Like those gory red errors, finding the answers is just another wall to surpass.
My top three choices are Carnegie Mellon University, Stanford University, and Massachusetts Institute of Technology because all three have innovative and challenging computer science programs. In addition, they are R1 institutions and leaders in Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning.  
My aspirations to attend these universities stems not only from their academic prowess, but also their student body. During Spring Break my family and I visited universities around Pittsburgh on a late Friday night. After wandering a bit, we walked into Carnegie Mellon’s Gates Center for Computer Science and saw students working and collaborating on projects. I could see their shared passion for their work, which is the first thing I am looking for in a program. I crave an environment where I am academically challenged, and my passions for research are nurtured. Based on campus my visits and email correspondence, I know these schools will satisfy my hunger.
Realizing you are in your late teens, and are free to change your mind, what professional career are you most likely to pursue post college? (Limit 150 words)*
My professional aspiration is to be an Artificial Intelligence researcher. The research I am conducting in partnership with Professor Ankur Gupta at Butler University has given me a glimpse into what work in this field entails. 
However, even before my work with Professor Gupta, I gravitated towards Artificial Intelligence research. My room sweltered from the heat of my computer’s processor as I conducted my own experiments and tests. After each trial, I would meticulously craft spreadsheets to uncover the story hidden in my results. 
Professor Gupta taught me the formal research process, which I continue to build on in my work with him and in my high school research course. I enjoy conducting research and its different aspects. My dream is to have a profession in which challenging questions are asked, current research is reviewed, and the attempt to answer questions leads to answers, as well as additional questions. 
Pragmatic. I haven’t always been a pragmatist; it happened after working on a time management app with a friend. Our high expectations and inexperience made the project torturous to work on, which eventually led to our surrender. I embraced pragmatism and adopted planning as a powerful way to avoid a repeat of such an experience.
Despite my emphasis on pragmatism and planning, they aren’t the most important aspects of my leadership style; the cornerstone is a personal connection. I learned its value in the last two years as a “follower” working at a Chick-fil-A. The job itself isn’t aligned with my interests and can be uneventful, but the people make it meaningful. Having the opportunity to socialize with my coworkers has taught me about their personalities, circumstances, and aspirations. In addition to making work more enjoyable, I have learned a great deal about the value of personal relationships and interaction. I witnessed an abhorrent manager struggle to be effective and a great manager easily secure commitment and passion from employees. What made the great manager so great is simple: they worked for the employees, as well as the company. This manager authentically cares about their employees, making others want to follow and to excel. 
Along with being pragmatic and valuing people, I understand the importance of flexibility and improvement. Practice is key to improving at anything, and leadership is no exception. In addition to practicing leadership in extracurricular activities, work, and daily life, I read books about leadership for improvement. From one such book, “How to Make Friends and Influence People” by Dale Carnegie I learned that a great leader will sacrifice recognition for the people they work for or in order to accomplish their goal. His message stood out to me: my emphasis should always be on those I am leading or working with, not on myself. 
Don’t get me wrong. I live in a great place. My hometown has been named the #1 place to live more times than I care to count. So how could I, a high school kid, make it better? Over the years I have learned with privilege comes responsibility--it is not acceptable to turn a blind eye to the needs of others. Because I recognize my privilege and want to help, I am a founding officer of Code for Change, a philanthropic computer programming club (soon-to-be non-profit) that creates software solutions for non-profit organizations.
After making our club operational, at the beginning, no one approached us with projects; we had to actively seek out opportunities to serve our community. We cast our net wide in the form of an email to various charitable organizations we knew, and, after many dead ends, we heard back from an Indianapolis non-profit, Exodus Refugee, which resettles refugees locally. We met with them in person the following week and discovered that they needed a digital system that would make it easier to coordinate and track hours for their interpreters. In that meeting, we learned about their mission, their needs, and their goals.  
As we analyzed Exodus’s requirements from a holistic perspective, we saw their problem as one other non-profits face--managing volunteers and other resources. We broadened their requirements to make our project into a volunteer management website, something which took us several months to complete. This not only fulfilled Exodus’s needs, it also maximized our impact within the community by allowing other organizations to benefit from our work. Since then Exodus has started using it, and we are continuously finding other organizations interested in using our project. Our assistance to Exodus has reached beyond software; Code for Change has secured $12,000 in funding for Exodus through grant awards, most notably Lead2Feed.
Since then Code for Change has grown dramatically, and we have taken on additional projects. Currently, we are working with the Indiana Civil Rights Commission and Carmel High School, and we are always seeking out new projects and opportunities to benefit the community.
Professor Ankur Gupta from Butler University has and continues to be very influential in my life. Beyond conducting research with him, I have had the privilege to learn from him. He is my mentor.  
Whenever I meet with Professor Gupta, I feel challenged; he exposes me to new ideas, the most significant of which has been a new way of thinking. In our first meeting as we discussed Machine Learning algorithms, he asked many questions that started with “why.” At first, this was off-putting, but I soon realized this is his way of thinking. In his mind, questions are far more important than answers, and answers are less valuable without understanding why they are answers. Because of my work with him, this way of thinking has infected me. I find myself asking “why” more and more as I attend classes, conduct research, and apply to colleges.
This simple question, “why?”, has had a profound impact on my current professional aspirations. One night as I was working on a website, for example, I had an epiphany: I was not thrilled about programming. This realization was earth shattering, and led to a flurry of “whys”: Why do I program? Why do I not like this project and like others? Why do I want to major in computer science? These questions plagued me until I realized that programming is a means to an end. I want to be a computer science major to achieve an “end.” Without the exposure Professor Gupta afforded me to research, I would have become a despondent programmer--just another code monkey for someone else. I am fortunate that Professor Gupta has invested in me; this is something that has changed my life and my future. He allows me to audit his senior level Introduction to Artificial Intelligence course and has provided me with additional resources for research, and insight into college. Ultimately, Professor Gupta helped me catch a glimpse of my potential future and showed me that I can be more. His faith in me has given me the confidence to take risks, question deeper, and find my passion.
I was waiting at the airport at 2 a.m. in May to welcome a refugee family to their new home. Although I hadn’t met them, I knew everything about them: where they would live, what they would eat, even the brand of toothpaste would they use. My knowledge of them was the result of the work I was doing for my Eagle Project: I assembled their new life in partnership with Exodus Refugee (a refugee resettlement agency).
For several months, preparing for their arrival felt like a full-time job. I made countless announcements, flyers, and phone calls to collect items for their new home. I wrote letters to businesses to solicit donations, responded to endless emails, and picked up donations. By the end, thousands of dollars worth of donations took over the first floor and garage of my parents’ house. This was not just a project; this family had become “my” family. I worked diligently for them to ensure they had more than the bare minimum. My hard work paid off; I collected luxuries like a computer, television, and bicycle for them to make their transition easier.
At 2:30 a.m., on arrival day, I watched the first of a procession of refugee families tiredly walk through the “Arrival” gate at the Indianapolis International Airport. Representatives from Exodus gave the families some instructions before I was able to meet with “my” family. We couldn’t exchange words--I don’t speak Karenni, but I knew the apartment would speak for me. Upon meeting them, I took a picture with them, and their eyes reflected the confusion, exhaustion, and weight of a new beginning. But, this was “my” family, so I wanted to remember this moment. After parting ways with them, I headed home, and my thoughts filled with pride about the role I played. 
A few days later, I heard “my” family had rejected the apartment without ever setting foot inside. They chose to live with family that had already resettled. After all that work and falling in love with “my” family, they rejected me without consideration. I felt betrayed. I had failed. I cognitively understood their reasoning, but I still felt rejected.
A few weeks later, Exodus asked me to reset the apartment--a different family with five children was arriving that week. As I built sets of bunk beds and rearranged furniture, I felt the sting of rejection instead of pride and satisfaction. If the apartment wasn’t good enough for “my” family, why would it matter? 
As time passed, so did the feelings of rejection. Originally, I had imagined the airport scene as the “happily ever after” of my project. Instead, I look back with bittersweet sadness, now understanding that success and failure are not final. The true conclusion to my Eagle Project taught me that helping and success are not measured by what we hope will happen, but by working to help others and continuing to do so, even when things don’t go as planned.
Jared Govert Stigter, 84, died of natural causes; loved ones who surrounded him during those last moments claimed he was cherishing life even up until his final moments. Although he has numerous notable professional and charitable accomplishments, Jared considers his crowning achievement his family whom he loved unconditionally.
Jared was born March 19, 2001 to Marvin and Michelle Stigter in Indianapolis, Indiana. His father was a software director and his mother a professor; both worked diligently to provide opportunities for Jared and his two sisters, Hannah and Gabi. During his teenage years, Jared earned the rank of Eagle Scout after completing an Eagle Project that collected over $70,000 in donations for refugee resettlement.A graduate of Carmel High School, Jared pursued his undergraduate degree in Computer Science at Carnegie Mellon University. At CMU he explored different career paths, but eventually decided to pursue a doctorate at Stanford University and become a researcher in the field of Artificial Intelligence. 
While pursuing his doctorate degree, Jared met Emily Doe, his beloved. After Jared’s graduation from Stanford, the two had two children fulfilling his life’s goal of fatherhood. Jared is survived by Emily and his two children Sara and William. 
After the birth of his children, Jared’s career accelerated. He led a variety of research teams though projects and studies to create a child-like Artificial Intelligence that could learn and grow independently. His research is considered foundational in the fields of Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence. Although his research is noted as his greatest professional accomplishment, he always claimed his children were the inspiration and his real greatest accomplishment. Shortly after this groundbreaking research was published, he exited the private sector in fear of his creation’s ethical implications. For the remainder of his career, Jared worked on the ethical considerations of Artificial Intelligence and continued to advance his research in the public sector. Jared’s professional legacy is preserved through living knowledge, and his impact on how humans interact with and utilize Artificial Intelligence is an important piece of his legacy.
Philanthropic efforts were also a major part of Jared’s life. Jared and Emily Stigter founded an endowment which they personally oversaw with the goal of creating true equality. Leveraging their privilege and wealth to benefit others was important to both of them. Jared wanted a person’s experiences and position to be determined by their own actions, not systemic privilege or marginalization. Since its inception, the Stigter Endowment has funded projects to integrate refugees into society, predict and prevent outbreaks of disease, increase democratic participation, and advance underdeveloped nations. Upon his wife’s death, the remainder of the Stigter fortune will be bequeathed to the endowment. 
Jared Stigter’s family wishes to share his final thoughts: “Life is over in a blink of the eye, but within that miniscule amount of time, there is a lifetime. I have treasured every moment: both the good and the bad. This is not sad; it’s the natural pressure of life that gives it purpose.”
